--- title: Acknowledgments next: title: Chapter 1 url: chapter001.html
prev: title: Preface url: preface.html layout: main --- <<pxix>>

** Acknowledgments
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: acknowledgments
   :CLASS: unnumbered
   :END:
We would like to thank the many people who have helped us to develop
this book and the curriculum it is designed to support. We have had
substantial help from the wonderful students who studied with us in our
classical mechanics class. They have forced us to be clear; they have
found bugs that we had to fix in the software, in the presentation, and
in our thinking.

We have had considerable technical help in the development and
presentation of the subject matter from Harold Abelson. Abelson is one
of the developers of the Scmutils software system. He put mighty effort
into some sections of the code. We also consulted him when we were
desperately trying to understand the logic of mechanics. He often could
propose a direction to lead out of an intellectual maze.

Matthew Halfant started us on the development of the Scmutils system. He
encouraged us to get into scientific computation, using Scheme and
functional style as an active way to explain the ideas, without the
distractions of imperative languages such as C. In the 1980s he wrote
some of the early Scheme procedures for numerical computation that we
still use.

Dan Zuras helped us with the invention of the unique organization of the
Scmutils system. It is because of his insight that the system is
organized around a generic extension of the chain rule for taking
derivatives. He also helped in the heavy lifting that was required to
make a really good polynomial GCD algorithm, based on ideas we learned
from Richard Zippel.

This book, and a great deal of other work of our laboratory, could not
have been done without the outstanding work of Chris Hanson. Chris
developed and maintained the Scheme system underlying this work. More
recently, Taylor Campbell and others have continued the development of
MIT/GNU Scheme. In addition, Chris took us through a pass of
reorganization of the Scmutils system that forced the clarification of
many of the ideas of types and of generic operations that make our
system as good as it is.

<<pxx>>

Guillermo Juan Rozas, co-developer of the Scheme system, made major
contributions to the Scheme compiler, and implemented a number of other
arcane mechanisms that make our system efficient enough to support our
work.

Besides contributing to some of the methods for the solution of linear
equations in the Scmutils system, Jacob Katzenelson provided valuable
feedback that improved the presentation of the material.

Julie Sussman, PPA, provided careful reading and serious criticism that
forced us to reorganize and rewrite major parts of the text. Julie
worked with first-edition coauthor Meinhard (Hardy) Mayer to create the
index. She also developed and maintained Gerald Jay Sussman over these
many years.

Cecile Wisdom, saint, is a constant reminder, by her faith and example,
of what is really important. This project would not have been possible
without the loving support and unfailing encouragement she has given
Jack Wisdom. Their children, William, Edward, Thomas, John, and
Elizabeth Wisdom, daily enrich his life with theirs.

Many have contributed to our understanding of dynamics over the years.
Boris Chirikov, Michel HÃ©non, Peter Goldreich, and Stan Peale have had
particular influence. We also acknowledge the influence of the late Res
Jost.

Numerous others have contributed to this work, either in the development
of the software or in the development of the content, including Bill
Siebert, Panayotis Skordos, Kleanthes Koniaris, Kevin Lin, James
McBride, Rebecca Frankel, Thomas F. Knight, Pawan Kumar, Elizabeth
Bradley, Alice Seckel, Jihad Touma, and Kenneth Yip. We have had
extremely useful feedback from and discussions with Piet Hut, Jon Doyle,
David Finkelstein, Peter Fisher, Guy Lewis Steele Jr., and Robert
Hermann.

We want to thank the generations of students who have taken our classes
and worked through our problems. They have provided exceptional feedback
and encouragement. Our students Will Farr, Mark Tobenkin, Keith
Winstein, Alexey Radul, Micah Brodsky, Damon Vander Lind, Peter
Iannucci, William Throwe, and Leo Stein were especially helpful.

We thank the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
for its hospitality and logistical support. We acknowledge the Panasonic
Corporation for support of Gerald Jay Sussman through an endowed chair.
We thank Breene M. Kerr for <<pxxi>>support of Jack Wisdom through an
endowed chair. We thank the MIT Mathematics and EECS departments for
sabbatical support for Meinhard Mayer, who collaborated with us on the
first edition. We are sad to report that Hardy is no longer with us. We
sorely miss him.

<<pxxii>>
